Rosovsky Fellowship Proposal

Sean Sullivan

How can technology help to solve the many global issues involving engrained psychological
prejudices and predispositions? Answering this question relies on knowledge at the intersection
of many fields, from neuroscience and computational fields to psychology and intrapersonal
negotiation and conflict. With my studies, and eventually thesis, in psychology and neuroscience
I hope to investigate questions within this domain, incorporating and interweaving my existing
technical skills, ideas from my identity based negotiation classes, and my neuroscience and
psychology background.

First, an illustrative example of technology applied in this way is helpful to begin imagining
the possibilities that lie at this intersection. Most people have an intrinsic prejudice favoring
people that appear visually similar to them. This is a mechanism developed evolutionarily and
is engrained in our psychology. In the modern world, this intrinsic bias, among other more
conciously developed biases, manifests itself in sexism, racism, and other prejudices. With
virtual reality simulations, however, the University of Barcelona’s Institute of Neuroscience was
able to present people with a virtual world in which they had an alternative identity. In this
world, for example, a white person would experience everything, from looking in the mirror to
interacting with others, with a black virtual body. After these experiences, subjects showed
significant, lasting, alterations in their limbic system, a very primitive part of the brain, that
made them more understanding of people visually dissimilar to their real world appearance.
As the researchers , there was a “reversal of racial in-group bias.” The impact that
widespread adoption of this technology could have is astonishing and exciting. Technology offers
a way to reduce natural biases that have become adversarial and harmful to our society, a
problem that is seen all over the world.

This framework of applying virtual and augmented realities to ameliorate racist biases
can be extended to a paradigm for solving issues that require understanding perspective and
identity of others. This approach has the potential to reduce heated zero-sum games with
winners and losers to win-win scenarios where people feel more understood and comfortable
with the process and outcomes. Israel, involved in one of the largest identity based conflicts
in history, provides vital context into the identity-based psychological aspects of this problem.
TavTech’s Virtual Reality Intensive, meanwhile, helps develop and bolster the technical skills
necessary for creation of realistic portrayals in virtual and augmented reality. The program as a
whole, between its location and course work, contains the elements essential to any work using
technology to addresses these neural and psychological issues. This program would undoubtedlyinfluence and benefit my future work, at Harvard and beyond, invaluably.

Beyond the technical content of the TavTech program, working on this project in Tel
Aviv will afford me the opportunity to make international connections in rapidly growing
entrepreneurial and technical sphere. After working for the first nine months of this year on my
own startup in silicon valley, going to Israel’s equivalent of the valley will introduce me to knew
people and perspective’s. Particularly given my own experience and existing connections, these
relationships would bridge two worlds in a mutually beneficial way from the start. Beyond just
the speaker’s brought in by TavTach, the startup accelerator I went through, Y Combinator,
has connections to several Tel Aviv R&D centers. By capitalizing on this network I will be able
to fully take advantage of all of the resources available in Tel Aviv.

This opportunity is unparalleled in the insight it would provide into the topic of virtual
reality and psychology of identity. Tel Aviv, and Israel at large, combined with the program’s
focus and existing connections, will give me the resources and context necessary to make the
most of this project. I ask that, in light of this, you seriously consider my candidacy for the
Rosovsky Fellowship to enable and advance my interest of applying technology to help others.
